Promise me you will come back.
What if I can't?
This is definitely
the biggest movie
that I've ever done.
in terms of its ambition.
The scale of all the sets.
and the amount of people
involved. it's just so large.
A great filmmaker
like Christopher Nolan
can do scope and action.
but also heart
and humanity and rawness.
This is him at his best.
going for it. you know?
Pedal to the metal.
like. we are gonna make
the biggest and most impressive
movie that's ever been made.
Let's go home.
"The Odyssey"
is a massive story.
And that's part
of the appeal of it.
is it's not really
just one story.
It manages to encompass
a lot of different genres.
So for me. the idea of taking
on this biggest of stories
with a top-level cast.
using all the techniques
and resources of a massive
Hollywood production.
Whether you're talking
about visual effects
or practical stunts.
real locations. building sets.
we needed to use all
of it for "The Odyssey."
every trick in the book.
That's never been done before.
and that's a really exciting
challenge to take on.
You're a man who needs
to control his fate.
But you cannot control this.
And three. two. one. action!
This is such an ambitious film.
It's sort of like seven
different ambitious movies
all rolled up into one.
We needed the right people
to take on this challenge.
Chris gets the finest craftsmen
in the world at what they do.
and then he asks everybody
to push the envelope.
That's the thing that's
exciting about these pictures.
is you can feel everybody
straining... straining...
to do better than they've done
before. to just fulfill
what's being asked of them.
Chris looked at me and he goes.
this is gonna be a hard movie.
And I said. yeah. I know.
And he goes. no. this is
gonna be a really hard movie.
And I was like. got it.
Part of what I've been doing
in my films over the years.
whether you look at "The Dark
Knight" or "Interstellar"
or "Inception." they're taking
sometimes fanciful ideas
but trying to ground them
in something
really recognizable
for the audience.
And I wanted to apply that to
the world of Greek mythology.
That's a huge task
for every department head
to find that reality.
to create an entire world
that you can put into action
in front of the camera
and then bring the audience
into that space.
Everyone's on that
same page of trying
to find the best possible.
essentially in-camera solutions.
My role is constantly
wracking my brains
for how are we gonna do this.
which may involve
special effects
or the art department
or whoever.
I reminded myself
and learned firsthand
every single day
Chris's motto of.
"If it's easy.
everybody would be doing it."
No one could
stand between me and home.
Not even the gods.
It feels like we made
six or seven movies.
and in a sense. we did.
Every single chapter
of this adventure
was at a different location
that posed
a different challenge.
You just know
that the locations.
when you're telling a story
like this. are gonna be
like characters unto themselves.
so they have to be
extra special.
And so we found ourselves in
these really amazing places.
There are parts of the world
that I don't think I would
even have ever seen
or known about
had it not been
for this experience.
There's a certain
level of information
that you learn when
something is real.
So when you go to these
places. you just feel it.
and it just adds another layer
to what it is that
you're trying to express.
Action.
One of the things I like
about shooting on location
is we're moving countries
every couple of weeks.
So it gives you this
incredible momentum.
The issue on this film
is that we're shooting
in extraordinary places
that were
hard to get to.
hard to shoot in.
You know. normally if you're
doing a Hollywood movie.
the base camp is 10 seconds
away from the set.
When you're shooting a
Chris Nolan movie. it's like.
no. that's a 45-minute hike in
sandals up there. full costume.
We're at a location called
Santa Catarina Castle.
It's on the top of a hill.
All the equipment drops
are happening here.
You guys gotta film
some of that.
Load-in's gonna be nuts.
Getting the camera equipment
and the grip equipment.
all of it just
up here on this hill.
We have. basically.
the footpath.
a funicular cable way
for equipment.
and a few helicopters to get
equipment and crew up as needed.
We all feel
so fortunate and lucky.
As hard as this is to work
like this up here in this...
It's worth it.
Being on a mountaintop
and having the capability
to shoot 360 degrees
and not having to worry about
blue screens
or visual effects lights
and all this sort of stuff
just gives so much freedom
to us as the actors
to just let it happen.
where you just have to be
a human being and react
to the beautiful sunset
that's happening
on top of the mountain.
I mean. every location
we went to. I would get there.
and I'd just start laughing.
You're like. who thought
you should shoot a movie here?
You know. we're shooting
in Nestor's Cave in Greece.
They say it's the cave
where Zeus was born.
and it's this incredible
place. but nobody's ever tried
to shoot a film up there.
And so to go up there
with the crew
and to see the rigging that
they did to basically turn it
into a natural sound stage.
yeah.
I don't know any other
director who would try it.
There was no location that
was straightforward and easy.
But all of those locations made
sense for the story. really.
It wouldn't be the film
that it is without going there
and doing it for real.
Tell me what you remember.
We won the war.
And then what?
Chris is not happy with
what's already been done.
He wants to do things that
haven't been done before
and do them on a scale that
hasn't been done before.
And anything he can do
to enhance the experience
of movie going and watching
and entertainment.
it's like. that's his goal.
My first day in Morocco.
they were shooting the beach
where they pull
the horse out of the water.
I asked. I was like.
can I visit set?
So I walk over this sand dune.
And I reckon I walked
20 minutes through extras
and boats and fires
and buildings
and all this sort of stuff
before I saw
the first crew member.
I was like. where is the crew?
Like. where is everyone?
That was the moment
it really set in
that I was lucky enough
to be a part of something
that is different and special.
Because I've never seen
anything on that scale before.
When you look
at large-scale filmmaking.
each section of the film has to
be as impressive as possible.
It has to take
the audience somewhere
they haven't been before.
Troy. for example.
and the fall of Troy.
we needed that to be on
an absolutely colossal scale.
I knew from the get-go
there was no set extensions.
there was no CGI.
We wanted to build
as much as possible.
Finding this terraced town.
Ait Benhaddou.
the different layers and
terraces helped us so much.
and then designing everything
into that.
This is pretty darn big.
It just feels like
a real massive city.
Let's just say we got
our steps every day.
And we wanted the horse to
rival the scale of the temple.
Did you ever hear
the story of the horse?
It's 35 feet tall.
8.000 or 9000 pounds.
We shipped it in. like.
nine or ten crates.
The audience is very
familiar with this trick.
Everyone knows what
the Trojan horse is.
It can't be
a big roller-skate...
it can't be on wheels. you know?
So I had this idea that
what if it's left there
as if it's meant
to be taken by the waves
as an offering to Poseidon.
Chris and I specifically
wanted a more
sophisticated-looking horse.
They're master craftsmen.
and they were sea people.
And so we took the inspiration
of the ship siding
and applied that
to the horse to make it
sort of a Trojan horse you've
never. ever seen before.
The goal was to make it
manageable by human power.
because in the script.
there's 100 guys pulling it.
And so we really
worked hard to try
to make it as strong
and lightweight
and durable as possible.
When they say it takes
a village. it certainly does.
Special effects built
the structural spine.
We made all the parts.
Originally. we had the entire
horse cut out of foam.
And from there. we made molds.
And then from there.
we made the fiberglass panels
and put all
the infrastructure in it.
This was incredible.
And they actually moved it
from the shore to the town
and erecting it up
the Temple of Athena.
It's really like everything
in this whole movie.
you know.
there's such a journey.
You know. everyone works
together to get it done.
When you see it all
together with the wardrobe
and the people.
it's absolutely epic.
I mean. it's just stunning
to see it come together.
All of those extras.
I remember going in the
extras tent in Ouarzazate
and going. holy mother.
It was quite extraordinary.
I don't know how
we've accomplished it.
What was always very important
in the design was texture.
The textures are really
absolutely essential
for each and every character.
Nothing was flat.
Everything felt
three dimensional.
and you could actually feel it.
There's so much detail
and thought
in every costume. set piece.
The sets are so massive.
and everybody's working
at such a high level
that you really feel immersed.
Like. I really stepped
into this world.
Ithaca's king is coming back.
No. he's not.
Odysseus's Ithaca.
with the palace.
we used these existing ruins
and built onto them.
It had to convince the audience
why he needs to get home.
When I first got to Favignana.
I didn't even realize that
the set part was a set.
I literally... like. I remember
just leaning against the wall.
and it was squidgy.
And it's completely seamless
with the real ruins.
It was absolutely incredible.
Ruth comes at everything
from a place of reality.
of going to a location
and building there
and changing it into what
you need to be.
basing it on something there.
This is all us. We put all this.
But then you can
turn around here.
and you get all of this.
which is epic.
We're gonna tie
this into our palace
on stage in Los Angeles.
Chris knew he wanted this
to be a very large set.
It's really our only build
of the entire movie.
Everything else is built
on location in an environment.
Ruth and her crew built this
absolutely incredible set
that was really huge
and really detailed.
And you walked in there.
and it didn't feel like a set.
It felt like its own world.
Nice. guys.
So just. like. a quick parry.
and keep going.
So parry. keep going.
forward. fall to the ground.
When you're taking on
something as epic scale
and grand as this.
about the attack
of the gates at Troy
and the Trojan Horse
and bow and arrows and swords
and now you think.
how do we take that
to the next level?
Walk through this bit
again. will you please.
when you grab these two axes.
I said to George Cottle. we
need the fighting in the film.
we need the action in the film
to be remarkable and credible.
and we need the actors to do it.
Matt and all of the cast
were in incredible
physical condition.
and they all worked
so. so hard to deliver that.
Movie fighting is really more
like dancing than anything.
because it really
requires both people
to be in the right place.
The guys that George
put around me were really
super experienced so that
I was moving from one expert
dance partner to the next one.
The actors have to be
as good as the stunt guys.
but then also bring the acting
elements into those equations.
So we try to make
the choreography
so ingrained in them that
they can truly concentrate
on their character.
You know. lots of directors
would look at the action
and go. that looks awesome.
Great. Shoot it.
But Chris is looking for.
why is it awesome
and what makes
these characters tick?
Finding those little story
pieces within the great action
is what makes Chris so special.
Okay. we're gonna go.
Action!
Keep us straight!
Rowers: Pull!
And pull!
When I was adapting
the screenplay.
I was sort of privately
kind of hoping I'd be able
to minimize the amount
of boat time.
But it's "The Odyssey."
Of course we're gonna be
on this boat for months.
as we were.
Last call.
If you do not need to be on
this boat. please get off now.
Boat's pushing off.
One of the main
challenges here was
that we were using
period wooden ships.
We did everything we could
to hide engines in them.
but those engines were
just kind of. like.
to keep them
in a certain direction.
These were ultimately
gonna have to be sailed
by half stunt. half cast.
There's a reason we don't
row great big open boats
around on the ocean
anymore. okay?
But to get that feel.
you do the real thing.
We rowed this boat.
When I say. "we." I mean
those poor guys out there.
There was a rowing camp.
because all Odysseus's guys
had to learn how to row
this giant 100-ton ship.
As that ship's moving.
if you drop that oar.
it can jam you in the chest.
and it actually has
the ability to pick you up
and eject you from the boat.
There needs to be
a real conscious effort
to make sure you're safe.
At first. it wasn't great.
but then within a couple
of days. they had it dialed in.
and they had oars in.
oars out. ready and rowing.
Row!
And row!
They learned how to put
the sail up on the boat.
They learned how to row.
You know. we're out there
doing these things for real.
and that is tremendously
taxing of people.
It was incredibly.
incredibly difficult.
Being out there
on the boat together.
and nobody could go off
or go sit down somewhere
or go to a trailer
or go... it was no...
we were out in the middle
of the ocean together.
And it was like.
what's the next shot?
We're doing a close up.
Matt is looking over where
the ship is sailing to.
and a dolphin jumps
right through frame.
I mean. come on.
I'll tell you where that
would not happen. on the tank.
And luckily. we had this
great big IMAX camera.
and we recorded it.
And for me.
it's been my long held dream.
I mean. really. since I was
about 16 years old
to do an entire film on IMAX.
The thing that was stopping
us was always the sound.
IMAX has an incredible
team of engineers
who found a way to enclose
the camera in this box
so that we could shoot
the most intimate scenes.
We could have the camera
six inches away
and still get dialogue.
And so for the first time ever.
we've been able
to do the entire film
on the incredible
IMAX film format.
It's a long held dream
finally coming to fruition.
We. as filmmakers. we're not
supposed to be comfortable.
We're supposed to present
the audience
with the best experience
possible.
So all our effort
was all in service
of trying to put our audience.
you know. in our shoes.
and experience
something extraordinary.
I think the IMAX
is gonna really allow
the audience to feel
like they are a part
of this journey with us.
You're really gonna be
immersed in this world.
I think Chris has a way
of pulling you in
when you're watching his films.
So naturally.
the same thing starts
to happen with the music.
One of the first things
that people would expect
when you go to see
a movie of this scale
in a movie theater
is to hear the sound
of a big. cinematic orchestra.
And you've seen that before.
You've heard that before.
For this one. Chris
wanted it to be different.
We wanted the film to feel
like a recognizable world
to people. even though it was
gonna be Ancient Greece.
We don't want it to look or feel
like previous movies
that take on this
kind of classical world.
What can we do that's
more timeless than that?
I knew that in order
to create this completely
original world. I also had to
get out of my comfort zone
and find sounds that
I haven't worked with before.
Ludwig went very deep
on researching the instruments
that they might have had
at that time.
Chris had mentioned early that
he was interested in aulos.
He was interested in lyre.
The aulos is an
ancient Greek instrument.
It was the most
popular rock star instrument
for 1.000 years.
This is a replica of an aulos.
The original dates from
between the sixth century
and the fifth century B.C.
We don't have
any surviving reeds.
So I worked
with two other people.
and we spent a while trying
to work out and figure out
how this bit worked at the top.
We had to read lots
of ancient source material
and try and work out
how they did it.
This is a reconstruction
of an ancient Greek lyre.
To be able to play it
in a philological way.
we have to do research
between iconography.
philological sources.
and personal experience
as a musician.
Nice.
Wow. You nailed it.
Another thing that
Chris mentioned.
too. early on
in our conversations
was to use bronze.
You know.
this is the Bronze Age.
So gongs. you know.
for example. made of bronze.
You know. you can
make these instruments
sound a way that
you never heard them before.
We started to experiment
with a lot of other stuff.
hitting walls. hitting railings.
hitting any kind of things
you could find outside.
like scrap metal
or air conditioning units.
Using vocals kind of became
how we could also add on
to some of the more
emotional pacing of the score.
There's real intimacy
and humanity in the soundtrack.
And I love that.
because it sort of subverts
all your expectations.
My dad is coming home.
Bringing vengeance.
Bringing it all.
I'm a big fan of film history.
particularly the silent era.
In-camera spectacle
was everything.
A cast of thousands.
extraordinary sets.
extraordinary locations.
Over time. with visual effects
technology. a lot of that
has got lost
in Hollywood production.
We're able to do both.
We can go back to
an older era of filmmaking.
but also add on to that
an entire level
of fantasy and imagination
through the power
of visual effects.
We're trying to do it all.
That's what "The Odyssey" is
and needs to be on screen.
Action!
Chris really shoots
on this massive scale.
on this massive format.
But he basically shoots
independent films.
And there's a lot
of urgency to that.
He goes the extra distance to
make it feel authentic for us
on set. which then makes it feel
more authentic for
the audience in the theater.
People know a lot of the story.
but they've never
seen it in this way.
And it really deserves
a huge canvas.
As a fan. I'm so excited
to see this film.
Let's go!
Like. I cannot wait
to sit in that IMAX theater
and completely be lost in
this world that he's created.
In your lifetime.
if there is one movie
that you go to the cinema.
no matter what.
this is the movie to do it.
because this is pure cinema.